---
layout: post
title: "The iPad Pro vs. the Web"
date: 2020-04-21
author: Neil Alexander
index: false
sitemap: false
---

I have been a casual iPad user for many years now and I recently made the decision
to replace my personal laptop with the iPad Pro. Outside of work, the iPad has long
been the first device that I reach for and the laptop was, admittedly, collecting
dust. I figured that, with a keyboard, the iPad would be more than sufficient for
day-to-day general use and that I can always fall back to using the iMac at home
if needed.

I have to say, I've been very happy with the experience so far. This is largely
helped by the addition of far better trackpad and keyboard support in iPadOS 13.4,
which finally helps the iPad to step over some of the barriers where using the
touchscreen can feel just a little bit fiddly. That's not to say that the whole
experience is perfect—there are still plenty of third-party apps which haven't been
updated to take advantage of the new features—but on the whole, it's pretty good.

I have been a Mac user for about 15 years now and, while I still enjoy using macOS 
generally, I can't help but feel at times like macOS (and perhaps desktop computers
as a whole) are often being somewhat forgotten about by developers.

I've increasing started to feel like Macs are suffering from something which I've
nicknamed the "Electron Paradox", which is the idea that most new applications for
the Mac aren't actually native Mac applications at all. Instead, many are basically
web app hybrids built using the Electron framework. Many other companies don't even
go that far and just build web apps instead, expecting users to find them through
the web browser. This is probably happening on Windows too and is exactly what
Google have been counting on with the Chromebook.

The problem with web apps, and by
extension, Electron apps, is that they often end up looking, behaving and feeling
wildly different to one another. I could step up onto my soapbox about how native 
operating system components have been built with care by real designers who are
paid a lot to care about accessibility and usability, but I would not be the first
person to make those arguments and I certainly won't be the last.

There is a realm, however, where this doesn't seem to happen as much, and that's
iOS. This is ironic, given that Apple first shipped the original iPhone without
any native software development kits and instead tried to encourage developers to
build web apps—a decision they went back on very quickly. However, Apple's monopoly
over application distribution with the App Store gives them a lot of control over 
the tools that developers can use to build apps and it has a fairly strict
guidelines on what constitutes a good user interface experience compared to a bad
one. 

The result is that developers have flocked towards developing for iOS, due to the
massive global reach that it has as a platform, and have done so primarily using
native toolkits and means. 